Proposal

Introduction

Ideally, the goal of Science, Technology and Society is to do work that is fully engaged with the practical details of human experience and effort and uses that engagement to develop theoretical understandings that reveal new points of contact and analyses. Simondo (2008) describes this ideal as an “engaged program” that seeks to use pertinent topics in theoretically interesting ways. This project attempts to realize these qualities by simultaneously applying theoretical critiques to a situated and particular software tool and modifying that tool in conversation with those critiques. The end goal is a process-object that exists both as a fully functional piece of software and a record of the progress towards analyzing and creating that software from an existing base. I chose this particular form because it draws from both the traditions of software development and Science, Technology and Society scholarship but sets neither above the other. An engaged product must strive to be fully available to more than just the scholars of the social sciences.

Masters Committee

Faculty Advisor: Vincent Duclos
Committee Members: Alison Kenner, TBD

Research Questions


Output

Specifically, the project will produce three artifacts: a paper, a piece of software and a git source-tracking repository. The paper will provide formal analysis of the original form of the software being considered. It will engage with social science literatures from traditions such as feminist critiques of technologies, critiques of algorithmic technologies, critiques of (often but not exclusively scientific) epistemelogical processes and software studies. Its discussion and conclusion will describe the particular view the software renders of the world and also argue how alterations to that piece of software might change its purpose, its views or its impact. The software artifact will be a modified version of the selected software whose modifications will be driven by the suggested alterations in the paper. These two software products (modified and unmodified) can serve to contextualize the paper and bound its theoretical claims to what is pragmatically possible for a software developer. Finally, all of these things and all other project artifacts (including this proposal) will be archived in a git repository and hosted online. Git will allow the process to be recorded and observed both in real time and in hindsight, giving the project a shape and an arc and a character outside of its final results.

Tenative selection of software for analysis: https://sahanafoundation.org/. It's written in a language I'm very familiar with and is also exactly the kind of logistics software I was envisioning. Here is their demo instance up and running: http://demo.sahanafoundation.org/eden/. I also think that analyzing an open source piece of "humanitarian" software has the potential to be more interesting & useful because their influence is ostensively non-commercial. 

Bibliography

Sismondo, S. (2008). Science and technology studies and an engaged program. The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies, 3, 13–32.
