# Invisible Mediators

Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. (2000). Invisible Mediators of Action: Classification and the Ubiquity of Standards. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 7(1-2), 147–163.

147 classification is significant and powerful work
148 everyone black boxes tech; how do we make things look like magic, who does the work and what cases don't fit; day-to-day of systems
149 work of classification; classification vs classification ysytem; different systems of classification of various rigors
150 standards necessary to bring together actors; deployed in service of interoperability, enforced, not meritocratic
151 classification always somewhat local; material nature of categories hard
152 both material and philosophical aspects of categories do work; idea that definitions flow from the consequences of them, not logical antecedents; membership as managing the tension between the understood qualities of membership and the potential of change in them
153 being ordinary takes work; 
154 lose or tight coupling - age vs clothing; scope; ecology of classifications - how many ways pulled and how differently; who classifies? 
155 reversable or permanent?; Attention to the net experience of the web of filiation
156 need to understand how these classifications inform moral order; each one validates and silences; creates and destroys; 
157 classification is ubiquitous; has material consequences; the past is indeterminate??; Politics of negotiating standards and classifications
158 categories determine the outcome of things - is recycling green if we dump the catalysts?; Classification systems are physical and habitual (speed of action FE)
159 we should pay attention to the figures of speech people select; the past can only be understood through classification

This is, I think, a shorter version of the book that Bowker and Star wrote on the same subject that I've already seen cited by Mackenzie among others. The idea of orginaryness being endlessly enacted is a powerful idea to think with and look for. What are the qualities that software engineers are constantly enacting? Ideas from my own experience are sticking to the design, best practices, code readability, etc. This general language could be useful for talking about how EDEN engages with its subjects and its referants. There will certainly be explicit classification and implicit classification.